by others to ride along, and one fellow took
quantitative bottom samples, so I became
familiar with the, not only with the techniques,
but also with the ideas behind it. That is all to say
that I did not become a pure plantologist, but did
have one foot on the ground, figuratively
speaking.
And finally, during these years, and also, and I
really, during these years, I mean since 49, and
also after 55, after the degree, during the
postdoc time, I participated in Cry's
expeditions, which were concerned with
production biology of plankton, and in part
conducted the work for him when he fell ill or
whatever it was. Cry had been interested in in the
rapid determination of plankton, particularly
phytoplankton. And rapid means rapid in contrast
to the microscopical work. What he wanted to
achieve is to work with hydrographers who take
salinity and temperature samples, which can be,
of course, easily determined, and somehow assess
the amount of plankton in effect in chemical ways.
He was the first to develop a sea-going
chlorophyll method in 1939. He then, which of
course only goes for the plants, and he then tried
to develop a method for the total plankton and
thought of filtering of the total plankton out of
the water sample of a liter or five liters out of a
water bottle over filters and thought that would
give him the total amount of plankton and the
chlorophyll would allow him to subtract the
phytoplankton We know now that he developed the
Cestan method. What he essentially determined in
coastal waters was, well, not in coastal waters,
what he determined was the total particulate
matter, which in coastal waters is
phytoplanktonal aride, so planktonal aride, but
also a lot of inorganic material. So his method we
call now Cestan method, and it was really his first
student, Gilbrich, who pointed that out to him.
that, dear teacher, you are all wrong. But he took
it gracefully, and in the 50s was the scientist in
the marine domain who pointed out to the rest of the
world that most of the particulate matter and
seawater in many, many places is not living, isn't
plankton, and you geologists better do this and do
that if you want to study the particulate matter
and seawater. Well, and later on, when realizing
that he didn't get at the zooplankton by just
weighing, he developed a method for
determination of protein, or albumin, as he
called it, again thinking, well, albumin or
protein decays relatively soon after the death of
the organism, so if I know the total protein
content in a sample and know also the chlorophyll
content, then I probably could figure out the
zooplankton. And these methods could be run on
board ships. So two or three days after taking the
samples, I already have the result and can plan my
further expedition accordingly, which was a very
modern idea. couldn't quite execute it, but that
is a different story. At any rate, by
participating in these expeditions, I became
familiar with the methods, but perhaps more
importantly also with his way of looking at the
world to take a hydrographic cast first, to
determine salinity and temperature first, and
then decide what biological samples to take,
which most pathologists and sociologists didn't
do. but that was the characteristic of his school
to really tie in with the hydrography. And that is
what I really learned from Krai. And the exposure
to this kind of doing plankton research and
I should really interject, his samples were taken
again from water bottles, that means from point
samples, and not from nets. Remember the argument
about the plankton pump. So the way of sampling
lent itself more easily to close cooperation with
the physical types. But then Kai was not in
chemistry, he wasn't a biologist, so he did not
scoff at looking at the microscope. We were
trained to know animals. And as I said earlier, I
have counted 1,000 animal samples, too. but we
were a little unusual by having this extra
exposure, which was reinforced by Wüst, who was
the director of the institute, who entirely was
interested in working on the Atlantic, rather
than the keel bay, because he felt he was the
legitimate heir to the meteor expedition, and
tried to publish all what was still to be published
on the big German Atlantic expedition on
meteoroid during the 20s. So that all the lectures
in physical oceanography were about the
Atlantic, the open ocean, rather than the local
waters, which is a little unusual for a coastal
station to be told always about the open ocean,
never about the home water. They didn't know
anything about keel waves. And on the expeditions
in the North Sea with CHI and, well, North Sea, the
physical oceanographers we met also all came out
of the Meteor School, so that the CHI students got,
I think, quite an unusual training for coming out
of a small institution, a coastal institution. In
Woods Hole and Scripps, it goes without saying,
but in Chesapeake Bay, it wouldn't be this way. And
this sort of slant is, I think, still reflected in
my way of teaching on the upper-division level.
And of course, my students, the graduates too, but
on the undergraduate level, I think I teach
differently from most other oceanography
schools or marine biology schools. I will come
back to this point later. So to sum it up, we were In
regard to the research on the biology of marine
organisms, we were trained, now let me back up, to
sum this up once more, we were trained by Kryan, by
Wüst, really as biological oceanographers, and
in effect learned not to concern ourselves with
the biology of marine organisms as a subject of its
own, but only as a means to understand the ocean
better.
So that is then 55 now.
Subsequently, I couldn't get a position because
there were no permanent positions around in
Germany. German equivalent of NSF began to see the
light and set out postdoc positions. They wanted
to begin to build up staff and they realized they
had to do something for the young people. So I
received a postdoc award for three years. took
with tenure in Kiel to work along a proposal of my
own to study the distribution, the vertical
distribution of copepods, crustaceans, in the
Kiel Bay, essentially. And the idea came from
working on these dissertation samples where I had
kept an eye on the other animals too, without
really making notes, but sort of had acquired a
feel that the notion that copy-puts migrate, what
every textbook said, there's diurnal
migrations, didn't really hold. They didn't
apparently migrate. And I proposed to the science
foundation, let's investigate that, using these
same samples we had already. So it was, in a way, a
relatively cheap investigation. And I could, in
fact, show that there is no vertical migration to
speak of in these waters. And I also could show by
study of literature that this had to do with the
salinity stratification. And the result then is
that the vertical distribution of these
organisms, where you find them, in which depths
you find them, had not so much to do with what the
elements liked, but where the currents brought
them, the currents and the mixing. And this, of
course, very contrary to what in those years, at
least every textbook said, including marine,
so-called oceanography textbooks, they all
implied that the animals, of course, you find the
animals at that depth which they like most, by just
migrating up and downwards. And I could show this
is not so. And because of the, it is not so in Kiel
Bay, and I could advance reasons that because of
because the salinity stratification exists in
many marginal seas, on many shelves, that it was
likely that at least the smaller copepodes would
not migrate there either, even in the upper mixed
layer. And I guess in hindsight that this was said
at least 10 or 15, or maybe by now 20 years too early,
because nobody has really picked that up yet. And I
have not been shown to be wrong. So it is still
hanging, so to speak. And most people can't find it
because they still use nets, with a few
exceptions. And the net is towed through the mixed
layer, and well, it's all the planters mixed up in
one bucket. And so you can't say what they do.
I will come back to this a little later because at
the end, really, of that period in 1958, I begin to
think about the problems of the mixed layer and the
plankton distribution in the mixed layer. And as I
said, I will come back to this later. But during
these three years, which I consider to be really
the most pleasant period of my professional life,
I was already something. I had a Ph.D. degree, had
also a reasonable income, but I had practically no
obligations. So I had the best of both worlds, in a
way. During these years, I did a few other things,
too. As I had said earlier, I had participated in
CRI's expeditions and in part conducted some of
these, and so wrote my own papers on production
biology, a la CRI. which was strictly concerned
with concentrations. Rate measurements were not
discovered by us, so to speak. And I also began to
work on polycate taxonomy. I wrote a few papers on,
really made revisions of some genera of benthic
polycates, sabellites, which are still in
interest, which I still have. And again, I will
come back to that later.
Yeah, and that is really the end of the training
period, because in a way then post-doc is still in
training period. By that time I had already
crossed the bridge in the sense of that I did not
pursue the teacher career and began to gamble now
on that there would be a university career, much to
the dismay of my father, who had paid through 1955
and who had said, well, had you chosen economics,
the bet would have been made, more or less, and you
would be something now, meaning something
already a university professor, possibly, or
something in the free enterprise system.
But before I go on, let me explain the ordinary way
one entered into a university career. One took the
PhD degree and then had to wait for what we would
call an instructor position to become available.
then became an instructor with some teaching
duties but not much but the main idea being now to
show to prove oneself by doing independent
independent scientific work for five or up to ten
years and then write a second second thesis which
is still the way it's being done in sweden in italy
and russia too so the really the second phd degree
allowing you to enter the university career.
That's quite different from here. So I had to come
up now with a very thick other tone entirely of my
own. And if you want to switch that off now, that
would be the timing.
So the question then was now what subject to
tackle? And in oceanography, of course, that
means not only having the idea, but also having the
logistics behind you. Would somebody take you
along on a ship, or would you get on a ship, and what
have you. And Krai said, well, What is coming up now
on the international scene is the IGY, the
International Geophysical Year. We, Germany,
that is, will invest into it, and this is your
chance. Participate in a large expedition,
gather very comprehensive material, and be sort
of assured of funds for working it up. And never
mind that you don't have an instructor position.
You will have money to work that up. And I suggest
that you work on the total phosphorus. And I
thought it was just absolutely against my
interest. First of all, there came up this chemist
issue again. I would be again labeled a chemist.
But also, I thought there was no issue to be solved,
no major question to be solved by this total
post-war business. And therefore, decided to
pursue, to take up again in plan I had had earlier.
to work on the plankton of the tropical ocean. And
to make that a little more clear, I would have to
back up for a moment and say that
in my mind the most comprehensive plankton study
ever made is that by Lohmann, who published in
1908. And that, in a way, is still the best
Planckman study ever, except now that he
couldn't, in those years, measure the rate. He
only measured concentrations. But it was the most
comprehensive study up until now, 1977, three
quarters of a century later. One of the
contributions by Lohmann being showing how
important it is to look at the small plankton,
phytoplankton and zooplankton, that nets are
inappropriate tools for collecting even
zooplankton, if you wanted to know the total
metabolism of the water column. That study of
Lohmann's had been done in Kiel, and my idea was to
repeat that study in the tropical ocean. And I had
begun to look for an appropriate site a few years
earlier when Nod, whom I had mentioned as somebody
sharing my room, had gone to El Salvador in, I don't
know, 54 or 55. But at that time, there was an
exchange program between El Salvador and
Germany, but their condition was you have to have
the PhD, which I didn't. So El Salvador fell
through, and in hindsight, it is good because I
would have had to work in estuaries, and I wouldn't
have managed to. I was not equipped to work. My
training was too weak to face the plankton
estuaries, really, to make some good story out of
it. The next attempt was to go to Brazil, and again,
there was an exchange program where Gerlach, whom
I had mentioned before, had gone and had studied
nematodes on Brazilian beaches, but that fell
through because I had written to the Brazilians
that I would need such and such instruments and I
would hope that they would provide it, and I would
bring this and this and that. And could they please
write whether they have 110 voltage or 220? And
when they were unable to answer that simple
question, 110 or 220, I thought, well, better not.
I knew of Hawaii, but that was out of reach because
of cost, because of the very unfavorable
conversion rate from Deutsche Mark to Hawaii. the
dollar. I didn't know of Bermuda, where there was a
very good current, very good program going on
under Reith and Menzel. So I settled on India,
where, again, exchange program, that is always a
problem, or was a problem, how to finance such a
stay on my own, because I sort of had told Kai, I
don't want to go with you, and so Kai sort of was not
angry, but somehow didn't feel obliged to now go
out on a limb and ask for extra money in addition to
financing his own expeditions. So I had to find my
own money, in effect, and so India was the next
place which seemed quite all right because India
was moderately advanced as compared with Africa,
say. Remember, I wanted to go to the tropics rather
than to the temperate Africa, warm, temperate
Africa, South Africa. There was nothing in the
tropical Africa, and in America there was nothing
either after Brazil
didn't come to pass. I'd never thought of the
Caribbean, I don't know why. At any rate, so that
was then India, and they offered a two-year
exchange, which anyway seemed very good because I
thought of a seasonal study and figured that the
first half year would be wasted by this or by that,
and I would get going only then after six months,
and I wanted to have a little overlap, means six
plus 15 months is already 21 months, so two years
seemed just right. And so I began to prepare for
that, prepare proposals, and also learn about the
carbon-14 method because that became known at
that time through Stema Nielsen's efforts and
gave a new dimension, really, to the question
about the tropical ocean.
Should I continue? Sure. I went to, I participated
in a course on the carbon-fault technique by Simon
Edison, so I got in.
I learned all the tricks from the grand man himself
and of course also became a little indoctrinated
in the good sense of the word. I could participate
in the Bergen Symposium in 1957, fall of 57, which
was the first meeting by people working on
productivity with a new tool and exchanging
ideas, and it was an enormously successful,
important milestone, a very successful
symposium and a really important milestone in
phytoplankton oceanography, so to speak. where I
learned about the Bermuda results. Reiser told me
about it and said, well, had I known, we could have
invited you to Bermuda, which was too late, of
course. But at any rate, I benefited very greatly
from what I learned at that meeting, what Reiser
told me. And then in early 1958, went to India to
work on the tropical ocean. That was the subject.
Seasonal study. in place. The tropical ocean, of
course, by definition has no seasons, but I wanted
to repeat Lohmann's work cast into more modern
terms. Now, without going into all the detail, I
state largely in Cochin, what is now known as
Cochin on the southwest coast of India, but run
into many difficulties of a technical term.
Working conditions, for example, were very
difficult. In effect, I had to do a lot of chemical
work, starting from salinity, titrations,
through nutrient analysis, into chlorophyll
determination, and of course phytoplankton
counting, too. But for all these two years, I
didn't have running water. But I had to do
chemistry out of water buckets, and not even
enough water in the dry season. So it was really
very difficult to do. Another difficulty was that
the research vessel, which was run by a Norwegian
aid project, was out of commission for seven out of
12 months. And of course, if you make a seasonal
study, it is a little difficult. Five months on a
stretch, that vessel was not available. So I had to
make do with other vessels or bottoms. Then there
was a general attitude by the Indian researchers
It was not very easy. Of course, to live there in
those years was not easy either. Not only no air
condition, but no refrigerator even, and
loneliness. So it was not very happy years.
I forgot to mention, among the sort of objective
difficulties, owing to a slight mistake by by a
clerk at the Indian Embassy in Bonn, I could not get
hold of my scientific luggage, which were five
crates, for five months. So for five months, they
were just sitting in the customs and couldn't be
released. And it took them five months to
straighten out that red tape. And during these
five months, well, there's some good always, of
course. During these five months, I read the
literature, the local literature, which I had not
had time to do beforehand. In a way, I went a little
unprepared, which I have found out later most
people do. They have said, yeah, and then they have
to do so many other things that they don't have time
to read about, not only about the Hindu festivals,
but also about the ordinary oceanography. But in
addition, of course, by being at the place, I could
read the local literature, which was in sort of
gray literature or manuscripts not yet published
and papers by the Department of Fisheries and what
have you, which all contained original data, so
that I had lots of original data and could plot, and
I had enough time to plot all these, and they all
didn't hang together. It was very, very strange,
and I couldn't make sense of it. But then when I made
my first cruise in August of 58, then it suddenly
fell into place. This was upwelling. that was in
effect, not in effect, I did discover one of the
major upwelling regions of the globe. All the
southwest, all the west coast of India is a major
upwelling area, which nobody had known before,
which of course took care of the idea of working in
the, the typical tropical ocean. It wasn't
typical. It was a strongly seasonal upwelling
region, but of course it was interesting enough. I
published on this right away, of course, but in
hindsight it was in the wrong place, in the wrong
journal. It was about the hydrography of
fisheries, I believe, of the southwest coast of
India, published in a first issue of a new
biological journal. It came out in 59, and none of
the people who went on to the Indian Ocean
Expedition two years later had read that paper. so
that all the ships working in the ocean stopped
sampling when they crossed the Indian Shelf,
because everybody knew nothing went on on the
Indian Shelf, and all the exciting parts, the
exciting regions, the western side of the Arabian
Sea. And up to this day, no physical oceanography
work of any quality has been done on the Indian
Shelf, because afterwards the Suez Canal was
closed, and so... Well, as I said, I published in
the- made a very meritorious publication, I'm
still very proud of, but because it was published
at the- in the wrong place and perhaps in the wrong-
at the wrong time to- that was it. Had I gone to a
congress, of course, and had given speeches, it
would have been different, but of course I
couldn't get from there to New York.
Now, yeah, had I gone to a congress, There was a big
Congress in 1959, the first international
Congress on Oceanography held in New York, to
which I couldn't go. But at that Congress, the
Department of Oceanography here in Seattle began
to look around for a new biologist because their
biological oceanographer had not panned out, had
not published and had to go after his six years, was
not promoted, and so they wanted to replace him.
And Ratri, who happens now to be chairman, talked
around and asked, do you know somebody, and ran
into Krai, and Krai said, sure, I have somebody
who's in India and who might be interested. And so I
got the advertisement, and would I be interested
to apply? and to cut this story short I did apply
because in Germany there was still no position and
although I was sort of assured that I wouldn't have
to starve it was clear that in order to enter the
university career I would still have many many
years of waiting without lecturing without well
just work on my own and I thought I was not old enough
to shoulder responsibility and perhaps begin
lecturing and so I wrote to Seattle and said, yes, I
would like to apply, but since I had burned my
fingers in India so badly, I didn't want to go right
away, sign my contract while still in India, but
suggested, asked, could I come over and look at the
situation over, and that suited them eminently
because they, of course, didn't want to buy
somebody either whom they had never seen. So
immediately after returning from India in spring
of 1960, I went here for six weeks and liked it very
much. And they liked me too, and so that was it. And I
appeared on the scene here in autumn of 1960. The
reason why I came here was the unsatisfactory
situation in Germany. But more importantly, the
positive aspect that the philosophy here, the
definition of oceanography, which is really due
to Barnes, Fleming, and Barnes and Rattray, was
very much the one I was used to. It was not marine
biology or biology of marine organisms, but it was
really oceanography. And they offered me a
position of responsibility and I also could enter
the teaching career right away. So it was really
more the positive aspect than the fact that in
Germany I would just have to do research, continue
to do research. But the upshot was that because of
all the duties piled upon me, the plankton work
from the Indian Ocean was never published. All the
samples had been counted, all the analysis done,
but I had never had time to publish, which is sad in a
way. But I had never had the three months or so which
I would have needed to publish. So that is still
there.
Are you ready to begin the Seattle career? Yes. OK.